Hi, everyone. Thank you for joining. Thank you for liking BSD. And hopefully, I will
try to encourage you to help developing BSD. So let's get started. So the program for
my discussion, for which I have 15 minutes, is to go through 45 slides. So hang tight.
Just kidding. But I will start with a bit of background information, compare some device
driver codes so we can have an idea how it looks between the different BSDs, call for
our help, and try to send a few ideas out about how we can work together on BSD drivers.
Speaking of which, what about BSD drivers? Well, sadly, the lighting doesn't allow me
really to show much. So basically, I'm gathering the list of different drivers for different
hardware, showing how, for instance, on FreeBSD for sound cards, you have SoundHDA. On OpenBSD,
you have SLEAR, then HD audio on NetBSD now. And so you have sometimes a driver missing
in one BSD, not in the other. They have different names. Sometimes history, which mergers, goes
somewhere, then patches come back, go. Some areas are more developed in one BSD over another,
like TV capture or sometimes Wi-Fi. So it's a bit frustrating in a way that we have this
awesome hardware support, and at the same time, not every BSD benefits always from the
other BSDs and the progress they make, or one bug is fixed in one and not in the other.
So to summarize, and good morning, it's a bit of a mess. Drivers everywhere, but feels
a bit sometimes like a rabbit hole, I would say. So we have a collection of drivers with
different history, some in common, some with different names. Evolution is not consistent
across the different BSDs. But thankfully, there is documentation. Let's have a look
at the differences between the different systems. So this is the manual page for driver on free
BSD. So as you can see, you have a few system headers, kernel headers in this case, some
functions which should always be implemented, probing, attaching, detaching, some throbbing
and twiddling, whatever that means. Some data structures with references to the methods
for attaching, probing and so on. And then a declaration for the driver for the kernel
to find it, another macro here, gathering, putting everything together. So looks pretty
nice and clear to me. But then if you look on netBSD, it's a bit simpler, actually, one
less header, fewer functions which are documented here, or mentioned here at least, then just
a single macro to attach all the bits together and declare it for the system. Then you have
openBSD. Oops. There's no manual page for driver on openBSD. So, hi, Stefan. You want
to volunteer? He said read the code. Yeah, gladly. You couldn't be more on queue. We're
going to look at UMB, which comes from openBSD actually. So this is the manual page from
openBSD for UMB. Well, documentation is usually very good. So that was just a joke. So basically,
the UMB driver is about a USB network card which does LTE slash 4G support on the USB
bus using the MBM protocol. So it's actually a standard protocol for mini cards across
vendors to support for cards from Dell, Ericsson, CR wireless, quite a few, and so on. And I
actually happened to have ported the code from openBSD to netBSD where I heard it works.
And then I also did it for freeBSD. And this is actually a side-by-side comparison of the
freeBSD code on the left and the netBSD code on the right. I didn't put openBSD here because
it's actually very, very close to the netBSD code, which is good news for the Java Harmony.
So just keep in mind that it's also an openBSD. But anyway, to prove my point, the netBSD port
is actually also quite close to the freeBSD one, but there are some differences. So again,
sorry if it's not super readable here in the room. Probably on... Sorry? Actually on the
stream then it looks less good. And I prefer to show my face than the code. No, I'm just
kidding. We wish we had planned better. No, actually we spent some time figuring different
options, but right now it's the best compromise. But to summarize, of course, the license text
stays the same. The system headers are quite similar. Some are in common. Some are necessary
in one over the other. Then if we keep scrolling down, basically the black part are identical.
The purple are changes. So then except for some debugging variables here, it's very similar.
At the top of the driver is like the variables. And then we reach the message descriptions,
the prototypes. They're actually very similar except on netBSD. Or actually in the original
openBSD driver there was a redefinition of static. So I followed the coding style that
I found in the original driver or in freeBSD in this case. So that's really the only major
difference in most prototypes. And it goes on and on. Then on freeBSD you have one big
difference on the USB stack where the definitions for the transfers are in a variable. So you
have the bulk ones in and out, like transmission and reception. Then we continue the function
for probing fits in one screen. So here as we saw in the manual page it's called probe
and netBSD is called match. Otherwise it does mostly the same. There's a few differences
in the USB stack. So get interface descriptor, find iDesk, but it's actually more or less
the same. Then that's the code to attach. It's a bit more involved. But of course some variables
are in common because it's the same code originally. Then quite a few changes, but it's actually
the same thing that is being done looking up USB device IDs on both sides. Some setup,
the printing for the console. So the USB stack is quite similar but also different. So here
you have get interface descriptor. Here you have something else which is the same. Yeah,
get interface descriptor again. The naming conventions are a bit different, but overall
it's very similar. So I can keep scrolling. I hope you get the idea. Basically we wish
the detaching code. Same thing again. Here we are. The driver of course is the part where
there's the most similarity because it doesn't have to be specific for each BSD. So there's
a lot more black as a consequence. We keep going. I'm not going to show the whole driver
of course. Don't worry. Another thing which is an important thing to have in mind is that
for instance even when the code is the same and USB stack behaves the same way, there
are minor differences. Like on free BSD I had to hold the mutex and a net BSD for a
similar call at task. I didn't have to. So you have to be wary of each specific requirement
of the underlying stack that you're using on each BSD. Some functions can be called
in interrupt context. Some cannot. Some require mutex. Some don't. So basically it's what's
going on. So my dream is to have one driver API for every BSD so that we can share all
the code. But in reality I don't know if there is any chance to get to that. However, it
would be great I think if we could go towards this and have more convergence. Take steps
to get closer. Maybe both on the community level as much as on the programming level
with the driver code. So I'm showing some ideas here today what can be done. In most
BSDs the drivers fit in one file usually for the more complex ones. There's sometimes a
few more files. But if we would change this convention we could have separate files maybe
put variables which would be then the same between the different BSDs in separate files.
So we can easily merge that when there are changes in one or the other. We could separate
the BSD specific code like free BSD specific, open BSD specific, NetBSD specific from the
driver specific code. Maybe another idea. We could go towards abstraction layers which
is not always great but maybe some prototypes, some variable types could be extracted the
same way. We could change names. One great thing about BSDs is that the systems are developed
as one consistent role and there are usually fixed releases for the whole system. So this
is maybe easier to do that in the BSD world than in the Linux world for instance and so
on and so forth. Outside of the driver code itself we have the system databases which
could be unified a bit more like the PCI and USB IDs which are sometimes different between
the different BSDs. Mostly the same but some names change including for register values
in some drivers. The driver names also are sometimes different for the same driver or
at least historically or sometimes not. So just showing ideas. We could also share git
commits if we would have a bigger closer convergence and if we would all switch to git. There are
mirrors too or there is gut. You can stay for Stefan's talk to learn more about that.
So basically I'm trying to set up a new exchange space for this initiative which are called
BSD drivers or BSD driver harmony. So I created a mailing list if you want to join where we
could discuss if the mailing list is the best thing to have. We are in 2023 so we could
also have a discord or something like that. Whatever the cool kids do nowadays. Or anyway
I set up some archives if you want to have discussions on the mailing lists. Maybe we
could set up an RAC channel. Maybe we could set up a wiki somewhere to specifically document
how to best write portable code across the different BSDs. Maybe we could discuss funding.
That would be very welcome. And basically to wrap up now of course each BSD has its
own community but maybe we could try to get closer even though we have the major conferences
and here the common dev room would be great maybe outside of the conferences to create
a space for this. So as mentioned, kind of drivers can be challenging. They are quite
close, similar but also different. So anyway I hope this is worth the effort and that you
will join, participate and that we can write BSD codes together. You can reach me at this
address. I'm at NetBSD actually. I'm also on the NetBSD financials board so it's easy
for me also to forward ideas in the higher spheres across the different committees we
have. We have many committees. And then thanks for listening. I will welcome your questions
also online. And hope it resonates for you.
Great. My question you can pick up fact sheets.
or I guess how difficult it is to make
an abstraction layer which would work on all three BSDs.
Then Taylor said then you have a force interface,
which is kind of true.
We all remember the XKCD.
I will just create a new standard
because there's too many standards.
Well, I don't think it's so difficult necessarily because,
as mentioned, a lot of drivers are actually very similar.
The subsystems are very similar.
I just learned this morning that in some cases,
there are already abstraction layers which are
coming like in free BSD from Juniper, if I'm correct.
So maybe this is something which could be used also across
the other BSDs converting code for that.
What did you say about Juniper?
That they are now pushing a new abstraction layer in
free BSD for the network drivers and it's worked out.
Someone already came up with my idea.
I think they're not really having the other BSDs in mind,
but this is something which would maybe help the free BSD drivers,
which would be then converted to be converted in turn to the other BSDs.
So maybe it's going to happen, the factor.
It's one direction we can push for.
That's why I want to talk to developers across the different BSD projects.
I contacted people on the open BSD and free BSD side already.
They are really receptive to the idea.
The issue is to spend the time and probably to make it happen.
Yeah.
More than the uniting the API,
it's more important to know when there's a subtle difference.
You need a new fix for this function and one BSD on for another.
If you port it natively,
you're going to trip over and call.
So you're not really asking a question,
but reminding us basically that some drivers or some subsystems
have very specific constraints on different BSDs.
So the assertion layer will have to keep this in mind really carefully.
Like what I mentioned,
sometimes you need a mutex, sometimes you need,
you can do something in a top context, sometimes not.
So yeah, for sure.
Time is up. Also for questions.
Can we squeeze one more or?
Sure.
Christophe.
Maybe we could start with something like vectoring out common code,
like what Matt Reinde did with the USBNet code,
and push that around as a starter.
Yeah. So you were just saying that for the stream,
we could push for, can you repeat?
The USBNet, what Matt Reinde did was
the common code for all the USBNet working drivers,
factor that out into library and use that in all the others,
about drivers and fix a lot of bugs by the way.
We deleted half the code, next half the bugs.
Yeah. So in that BSD, we've been pushing for USBNet,
unifying drivers on the USB network category to make them more,
the same, we found many bugs and it helped get them all closer together.
Yeah. Okay. I guess we'll stop here for now.
Yeah.
And let the next speaker speak in three minutes. Thank you.